# Topic : The process of Alzheimer's Disease using the Biopsychosocial Model in contrast to the Biomedical Model
- Alzheimer's is a general term used to describe a significant decline in cognitive ability that interferes with a person's activities of daily living. Alzheimer disease (AD) is the most prevalent type of dementia, accounting for at least two-thirds of cases in individuals aged 65 and older.Alzheimers Disease is a neurodegenarative disease that usually starts slowly and progressively worsens. The most common early symptom is having difficulty remembering recent events.
# References 
## Bäckman, L., Jones, S., Berger, A. K., Laukka, E. J., & Small, B. J. (2004). Multiple cognitive deficits during the transition to Alzheimer's disease. Journal of internal medicine, 256(3), 195-204.
 - The literature on cognitive markers in preclinical AD is reviewed. The findings demonstrate that impairment in multiple cognitive domains is typically observed several years before clinical diagnosis. Measures of executive functioning, episodic memory and perceptual speed appear to be most effective at identifying at-risk individuals. The fact that these cognitive domains are most implicated in normal cognitive aging suggests that the cognitive deficit observed preclinically is not qualitatively different from that observed in normal aging. The degree of cognitive impairment prior to the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) appears to generalize relatively well across major study characteristics, including sample ascertainment procedures, age and cognitive status of participants, as well as time to diagnosis of dementia. In episodic memory, there is evidence that the size of the preclinical deficit increases with increasing cognitive demands. The global cognitive impairment observed is highly consistent with observations that multiple brain structures and functions are affected long before the diagnosis of AD. However, there is substantial overlap in the distribution of cognitive scores between those who will and those who will not be diagnosed with AD, hence limiting the clinical utility of cognitive markers for early identification of cases. Future research should consider combining cognitive indicators with other types of markers (i.e. social, somatic, genetic, brain-based) in order to increase prediction accuracy. 
## Storandt, M., & Morris, J. C. (2010). Ascertainment bias in the clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer disease. Archives of neurology, 67(11), 1364-1369.
- The clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer disease (AD) is often based, at least in part, on poor cognitive test performance compared with normative values. The aim of the study was to  examine the presence and extent of an ascertainment bias (omission of affected individuals) produced by such criteria when applied as early as possible in the course of the disease. The study was aLongitudinal study (1979-2008) and was set in Washington University Alzheimer Disease Research Center, St Louis, Missouri. The participants were of 78 individuals aged 65 to 101 years enrolled as healthy controls, 55 later developed autopsy-confirmed AD; 23 remained cognitively healthy and did not have neuropathologic AD. Areas under the curve from receiver operating characteristic analyses ranged from 0.71 to 0.49; sensitivities and specificities were unsatisfactory even after adjusting for age and education, using combinations of tests, or examining longitudinal decline before clinical diagnosis. Reliance on divergence from group normative values to determine initial cognitive decline caused by AD results in failure to include people in the initial symptomatic stage of the illness.
## Swallow, J. (2017). Expectant futures and an early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease: Knowing and its consequences. Social Science & Medicine, 184, 57-64.
 - Efforts to diagnose Alzheimer's disease (AD) at earlier stages as a means to managing the risks of an ageing population, dominate scientific research and healthcare policy in the UK. Drawing on qualitative data gathered across an out-patient memory service and in-patient hospital in the UK, the purpose of this paper is to examine the ways in which the hopeful promissory claims of early diagnosis as it maintains the dominant biomedical model for managing AD, are negotiated by healthcare practitioners. In the article, data was collected in two memory clinics and a hospital in a large teaching hospital trust in Yorkshire, UK. Data was collected over a one-year period and ethical approval was obtained from the relevant NHS Research Ethics Committee. Overall, this research was an ethnographic study exploring the role of cognitive screening tools in the process of diagnosing Alzheimer's disease in the clinic. Firstly, it enacts a vision of the future filled with uncertainty and anxiety since it restricts patients' experiences of memory loss beyond conceptualisations of loss of ‘self’. Secondly, it enacts a vision of the future through which the promissory claims of early diagnosis are difficult to imagine.
## Spector, A., & Orrell, M. (2010). Using a biopsychosocial model of dementia as a tool to guide clinical practice. International Psychogeriatrics, 22(6), 957–965. doi:10.1017/S1041610210000840
 - Over the years, a number of non-medical and psychosocial explanations and models of dementia have been proposed, due to the complex nature of the illness. However, there is a need for a more pragmatic, user-friendly model which takes into account the biological, psychological and social processes.Existing models of dementia were amalgamated into a revised, pragmatic model which aims to increase our understanding of the factors that may lead to improvement or deterioration in dementia and to illustrate the role of psychosocial factors in the context of biological processes. The model suggests that in both psychosocial and biological domains there are fixed factors (aspects which relate to history or risk factors and therefore not amenable to change), tractable factors (aspects which may be amenable to change), and interventions with potential benefit. The trajectory of dementia is presented as a process, beginning with aging and ending in death. Both the fixed and the tractable factors may influence the severity of dementia, affecting function, the speed and nature of the deterioration, and the appropriateness and effectiveness of interventions. A working case example is provided, demonstrating how the model may be used by clinicians when assessing the difficulties of an individual with dementia and identifying ways to improve the quality of life and reduce excess disability for that person.
##  Cuijpers, Y., & Van Lente, H. (2015). Early diagnostics and Alzheimer's disease: Beyond ‘cure’and ‘care’. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 93, 54-67.  
 - The biomedical model perceives dementia as a pathological condition that should be diagnosed and treated. It is characterized as an illness with progressive decline, of which you should recognize the symptoms and gain insight into the underlying causes.  Since effective treatment is not available yet, it is of utmost importance to develop effective disease modifying treatment or preventative measures. The central question of this paper is how the development of early diagnostics for Alzheimer's disease is entangled with specific definitions of Alzheimer's disease and articulations of problems and solutions in dealing with Alzheimer's disease in the (near) future. We do this by analyzing the various meanings of early diagnostics in two very different settings. First of all it was conclude that a broad variety of articulations is present, in both settings. Secondly, it was found that, notwithstanding this variety, the huge diversity of ideas appears to be clustered. The study found that the envisioned implications of early diagnostics are entangled with cure and care strategies in various ways.
## Bayraktar, Y., Isik, E., Isik, I., Ozyilmaz, A., Toprak, M., Kahraman Guloglu, F., & Aydin, S. (2022). Analyzing of Alzheimer’s Disease Based on Biomedical and Socio-Economic Approach Using Molecular Communication, Artificial Neural Network, and Random Forest Models. Sustainability, 14(13), 7901. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14137901
 - Alzheimer’s disease will affect more people with increases in the elderly population, as the elderly population of countries everywhere generally rises significantly. However, other factors such as regional climates, environmental conditions and even eating and drinking habits may trigger Alzheimer’s disease or affect the life quality of individuals already suffering from this disease. Today, the subject of biomedical engineering is being studied intensively by many researchers considering that it has the potential to produce solutions to various diseases such as Alzheimer’s caused by problems in molecule or cell communication. In this study, firstly, a molecular communication model with the potential to be used in the treatment and/or diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease was proposed, and its results were analyzed with an artificial neural network model. Secondly, the ratio of people suffering from Alzheimer’s disease to the total population, along with data of educational status, income inequality, poverty threshold, and the number of the poor in Turkey were subjected to detailed distribution analysis by using the random forest model statistically. As a result of the study, it was determined that a higher income level was causally associated with a lower risk of Alzheimer’s disease.
 - ## Sabat SR. A Bio-Psycho-Social model enhances young adults&#x2019; understanding of and beliefs about people with Alzheimer’s disease: A case study. Dementia. 2011;11(1):95-112. doi:10.1177/1471301211416612
 - The incidence of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is predicted to grow by multiples in the coming decades, and today's young adults will be formal and/or informal caregivers in unprecedented numbers. Their ability to support the independence and well-being of people with AD will depend on their ability to identify intact social and cognitive abilities, selfhood, and needs of people with AD. The case study, conducted in an undergraduate seminar, provides preliminary, suggestive evidence for the educational advantages of a Bio-Psycho-Social approach to understanding these aspects of people with AD. Findings revealed a striking increase in students’ accurate understanding of: (1) the losses due to AD; (2) intact positive qualities in and inaccurate negative stereotypes about people with AD; and (3) important needs of people with AD. These are discussed in light of extant theory. The application of this approach in the case of one student and her family is explored.
 - 
## Milestone 4: Final Essay:
  According to Bronstein and Pulst (2003), "memory impairment and a disruption in at least one other thinking function are hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease, a progressive disease of the human brain."  We immediately think of elderly individuals when we hear about Alzheimer's illness.  This is due to the fact that persons over 65 are most likely to develop this illness.  According to statistics, one in eight people will develop Alzheimer's disease once they turn 65 (Cavanaugh & Blanchard-Fields, 2002).  Dementia, which includes Alzheimer's disease, is any illness that damages the brain (Cavanaugh & Blanchard-Fields, 2002).According to Bronstein and Pulst (2003), an Alzheimer's diagnosis is a "diagnosis by exclusion."  This indicates that while there are numerous tests that rule out other illnesses, there isn't a specific test for Alzheimer's.  Short-term memory loss is addressed in the early stages.  This can include forgetting to switch off the stove, forgetting which pills need to be taken, or forgetting which prescriptions were taken on a given day.  The deficits in abstract thinking and intellectual function development become increasingly apparent as the disease worsens (Bronstein & Pulst, 2003).  People experience severe confusion and disorientation as the illness progresses. Alzheimer's disease has a wide range of contributing factors. In recent decades, numerous academics have questioned the discourse and the underlying biomedical concept. The biopsychosocial model states that Alzheimer's disease is an illness that affects people and is brought on by brain degradation.  Thus, medical control is the best approach to dementia; despite the fact that there is presently no cure, medical professionals should identify, treat, and manage dementia. The biomedical paradigm has come under fire for ignoring the social aspects, which has a detrimental impact on policies and research decisions as well as the experience of living with dementia.  According to Claudia Chaufan, for example, Alzheimer's disease has been actively marketed as a medicalized illness with a biological approach to treatment.  In policy domains, this "excludes alternative problem definitions" and has resulted in a "triumph of cure over care." Similarly, Ingunn Moser investigated the ways in which Alzheimer's illness has been framed as significant in many contexts, including parliamentary politics.  Alternatives are "made absent, invisible, and less real," according to her, while "pharmaceutical and biomedical versions of the disease present, visible, strong, and dominant."  Instead than being presented as a different approach to the problem, care is reduced to "doing nothing," which is a costly last resort . In addition to having an impact on politics, legislation, and resource allocation, the prevalence of a biological model of Alzheimer's disease is criticized for having detrimental effects on dementia care and the experience of living with dementia. This essay will discuss the process of alzheimers disease by using the biopsychosocial model in contrast to the biomedical model. 
  The biomedical model emphasizes the function of aberrant protein deposits (plaques and tangles) in brain tissue and focuses on the biological causes of Alzheimer's disease.  These alterations ultimately impact memory, language, and other cognitive processes by causing neuronal death and cognitive decline.  In addition to cognitive evaluations, medical testing such as blood and brain scans are commonly used for diagnosis.  The mainstay of treatment consists of drugs that can temporarily control certain symptoms, such memory loss, but do not change how the illness progresses.  The strength of the biomedical approach is its capacity to pinpoint biological markers and create tailored therapies, but it can also be faulted for ignoring the subjective feelings of the patient and the larger context of the illness. A person who has family members with Alzheimer's disease has a higher probability of receiving an Alzheimer's diagnosis themselves because the disease is also genetic.  This illness is said to have numerous consequences on the brain.  One condition in Alzheimer's patients' brains is a mutation of a single gene (Bronstein & Pulst, 2003).  Alzheimer's disease is also associated with certain proteins in the brain.  The early onset of the disease is caused by two presenilins and the amyloid precursor (Bronstein & Pulst, 2003) (Brzyska & Elbaum, 2003).  Apolipoprotein E (apoE) is the most prominent marker of Alzheimer's disease.  This gene exists in three different variants. The one most strongly associated with Alzheimer's patients is ApoE 4.  When a child inherits this gene, they get two copies—one from each parent.  This significantly raises the child's risk of contracting the illness.  Another variant of the gene, ApoE2, runs the opposite course and lowers the risk of developing Alzheimer's disease. Since Alzheimer's is a genetic condition and is also influenced by how your genes respond to your environment, there aren't many ways to avoid it.  It has recently been established that drinking from aluminum cans does not induce Alzheimer's disease, as previously believed.The study first offered two new MC and ANN models of Aβs causing Alzheimer's disease in a fluid medium to forecast some unknown values of MMs and increase the amount of MMs in the receiver. In a study by Bayraktar, Y,. et al, 2002 , receptors were also taken into account to improve realism with regard to biological live cells.  The lowest Aβ ratio in the medium resulted in the greatest amount of molecules received.  For the MC model, the maximum result was 65 molecules with an Aβ ratio of 0, while for both the ANN and MC models, the lowest result was 0 molecules with an Aβ ratio of 0.05. The number of molecules received by ANN was examined and the outcomes were compared after the number of molecules received for various Aβ ratio values was determined.  Following the acquisition of ANN and MC model findings, an error analysis was conducted in order to conduct a scientific comparison of the two models utilizing residual theory.  The comparison of the ANN and MC models produced very low residual findings, although the residual values for an Aβ ratio of zero were larger than those for other Aβ ratios. 
  A study by Bennett et al., 2004 found that NFT and cognitive impairment are shown to be significantly more closely correlated in clinical-autopsy correlation studies than amyloid and cognitive impairment. But it appears that neurodegeneration, particularly synapse loss , has the strongest association with cognitive impairment and other postmortem findings of Alzheimers disease.  Although people with substantial NFT load rarely exhibit no cognitive symptoms, over 30% of cognitively normal older subjects have enough pathology to meet criteria for AD at autopsy (Knopman et al., 2003). Particularly in the elderly, cognitive dysfunction is a functional problem that follows brain tissue destruction and is categorized as mild, moderate, or severe based on the severity of the illness. Treatment for mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is challenging and has numerous causes. According to reports, MCI can be effectively treated with biopsychosocial holistic care methods. Gong et al. conducted a study to investigate how older individuals with MCI responded to biopsychosocial holistic treatment models. The research cohort consisted of 140 MCI patients who were diagnosed at Nantong People's Hospital (Nantong, China) between March 2019 and March 2020.  Participants were randomly assigned to either the observation group or the control group, with 70 cases in each group, using a computer-generated randomization list.  Before, one month, and three months after therapy, we compared the two groups' cognitive function and quality of life scores. During the first three months following the intervention, the observation group's activities of daily living (ADL) score was lower than the control group's, and their mini mental state examination (MMSE) and Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) scores were higher.  At the third month of treatment, the two participant groups' differences in MMSE and MoCA scores were statistically significant (P=0.000). The study found that Biopsychosocial holistic care models can improve the cognitive function and quality of life of elderly MCI patients.
  By taking into account how biological, psychological, and social elements interact to shape an individual's experience with Alzheimer's, the biopsychosocial model provides a more comprehensive viewpoint.  Cognitive decline and emotional well-being can be greatly impacted by psychological issues, including personality changes, anxiety, and despair.  Daily functioning and quality of life are significantly impacted by social factors, such as caregiver burden, social support, and environmental adjustments.  In order to encourage independence and well-being, a biopsychosocial approach to care may include not only medication but also therapy, caregiver support, and environmental changes. The biopsychosocial (BPS) framework was defined by Engel as "a scientific model constructed to take account of the missing dimensions of the biomedical model."  Engel's original proposal, which aimed to provide a framework for diagnosing and treating psychosomatic illness, urged doctors to consider how biology, psychology, and social issues influence how health manifests and how a treatment affects psychological, physical, and social functioning. Since its groundbreaking publication in 1977, the biopsychosocial model has gained acceptance as a clinical paradigm for medical education as well as for careers in nursing, social work, psychology, and marriage and family therapy. It also served as the basis for the development of integrated care and medical family therapy.  Numerous physical and mental disorders, patient and physician experiences, and the art and science of medicine have all been examined using the BPS. Hopper et al, 2023 conducted a study to find predictors of SCD and SCD-related concern using data from the Canadian Longitudinal Study on Aging (CLSA), a sizable nationwide cohort including people ages 45 to 85 at baseline. Associations between biopsychosocial factors and SCD were found in the primary analysis, which used a Poisson regression model (analytic sample: n = 21,920). An ordinal regression model was used in a second analysis to find correlations between biopsychosocial factors and worry linked to sickle cell disease (analytic sample: n = 12,694). Results found that several risk and protective markers of cognitive decline, including physical activity, hypertension, and eyesight issues, as well as minority stress characteristics like race and sexual orientation, were not linked to SCD in the group under study.  Instead, SCD was more consistently associated with psychosocial characteristics (personality traits, sadness, and perceived social status) within the sample.  Increased fear about SCD, thought to raise the risk of dementia in the future, was linked to certain personality traits, depression, age, gender, and sexual orientation. The study's findings support the link between SCD and a number of health variables, but they also highlight how crucial it is to take social and psychological aspects into account when defining SCD and its risk factors. A study conducted by Ravolta et al, aimed to examine the impact of training staff to use the BPS model on skills of formulation, attitude towards dementia and sense of role competence. 
The study employed a within-subjects design.  The BPS approach was taught to thirty-seven employees who worked in residential care facilities, inpatient wards, and community mental health teams (CMHTs) that provided dementia care.  Baseline, post-training, and four-week follow-up outcomes were measured. The findings demonstrated that after training, staff members' comprehension, formulation, and development of interventions for individuals with dementia improved dramatically.  Positive attitudes and a sense of competence improved slightly but not significantly after training.  Additionally, employees stated that the training enhanced their comprehension of the medical and psychological aspects of dementia. This study offers early evidence that staff members' comprehension and development of interventions for individuals with dementia can be enhanced by educating them to apply the BPS model.  To reach certain conclusions regarding its efficacy, more investigation would be necessary.
  In conclusion, A biopsychosocial approach aids in the customization of individual interventions, while the biomedical approach assists caregivers in comprehending the type of dementia a patient has been diagnosed with and any behavioral problems that may manifest . Thus, a combined strategy can aid in forecasting the course of the disease, managing symptoms effectively, and making care plans (Gove et al., 2018).  Building a therapeutic relationship with individuals who have dementia and supporting them during the care process requires an understanding of dementia as a disease and its symptoms (Quinn et al, 2017). When care practitioners have an understanding of the dementia disease processes, along with the social influences affecting the individual, a person-centred, strengths-based approach can support people with dementia to engage in meaningful activity as part of quality in dementia care .  This requires combining the bio-psychosocial approach with person-centered care principles, such as respect, dignity, understanding of experiences and goals, and the giving of responsibility.  In this way, people with dementia can have their personal, social and emotional needs met alongside their medical needs.  The person-centered bio-psychosocial model also motivates and encourages people with dementia to have more independence, and results in a more cost- and time-efficient, high-quality care service. The two models can be integrated to provide a more comprehensive understanding of Alzheimer's disease. For example, understanding the biological mechanisms of the disease can inform treatment strategies, while recognizing the psychological and social factors can help tailor support and interventions to the individual's needs.

## References:
## Bayraktar, Y., Isik, E., Isik, I., Ozyilmaz, A., Toprak, M., Kahraman Guloglu, F., & Aydin, S. (2022). Analyzing of Alzheimer’s Disease Based on Biomedical and Socio-Economic Approach Using Molecular Communication, Artificial Neural Network, and Random Forest Models. Sustainability, 14(13), 7901. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14137901
## Chaufan, C., Hollister, B., Nazareno, J., & Fox, P. (2012). Medical ideology as a double-edged sword: The politics of cure and care in the making of Alzheimer’s disease. Social Science & Medicine, 74(5), 788-795.
## Moser, I. (2008). Making Alzheimer’s disease matter. Enacting, interfering and doing politics of nature. Geoforum, 39(1), 98-110.
## Bennett, D. A., Schneider, J. A., Wilson, R. S., Bienias, J. L., & Arnold, S. E. (2004). Neurofibrillary tangles mediate the association of amyloid load with clinical Alzheimer disease and level of cognitive function. Archives of neurology, 61(3), 378-384.
## Knopman, David S., Joseph E. Parisi, Alessandro Salviati, Misericordia Floriach-Robert, Bradley F. Boeve, Robert J. Ivnik, G. E. Smith et al. "Neuropathology of cognitively normal elderly." Journal of Neuropathology & Experimental Neurology 62, no. 11 (2003): 1087-1095.
## Engel, G. L. (1977). The need for a new medical model: a challenge for biomedicine. Science, 196(4286), 129-136.
## Shawna Hopper, Nicole G. Hammond, Vanessa Taler, Arne Stinchcombe (2023) ; Biopsychosocial Correlates of Subjective Cognitive Decline and Related Worry in the Canadian Longitudinal Study on Aging. Gerontology  69 (1): 84–97.
## Revolta, C., Orrell, M., & Spector, A. (2016). The biopsychosocial (BPS) model of dementia as a tool for clinical practice. A pilot study. International psychogeriatrics, 28(7), 1079–1089. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1041610215002379
